---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Applying Ethics to Computing"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-07-16
published: true
labels:
  - Questions
  - Answers
  - StackOverflow
---

## Applying Ethical Frameworks to my Beliefs
Computers in the modern day pose major ethical questions, as some boundaries that we have in real life are broken down when seperated by a screen. This is why it is important to pose questions in the modern day that challenge ethical framework. One of these is this: If everyone agreed to take an ethical point of view by respecting others and their core values, would there be any need for a rigorous study of ethics?
I personally believe that there would still definitely need to be a rigorous study of ethics. Even if everyone decided to take ethical approaches and respect each other’s values, that does not mean that difficult situations that challenge those values would stop occurring. An example of this could be a single mother working a full-time job who needs to write one more essay for a class so she can graduate. However, she is required to put in lengthy overtime hours at the place she works. She does not have the time to write this essay, and finds an online company to research and finish her paper for her. From the Kantian point of view, her actions were morally wrong as she treated her professor as a means to an end, and should have informed them of her circumstances. However, if we were to assume that the professor’s class syllabus explicitly stated that there would be no assignment extensions, we could not fault the professor if they denied her extension request, as he would just be enforcing the rules of his class. In situations like these, which decisions are ethical and which are not becomes murky territory. Either she or her professor would have to spin a lie to satisfy both parties. 

A specific technology/software solution which has created an ethical dilemma nowadays is the rise of Artificial Intelligence, primarily targeting the art industry. AI nowadays has evolved to a point where it can reliably create beautiful works of art, on par or even surpassing human ability. Unfortunately, this has a side effect of taking jobs and commissions from talented digital artists. Let’s imagine that Carla instead was offered a digital art commission from a talented online artist who she really enjoys the work of. Instead of paying off the commission, she uses artificial intelligence to create what she wants in the style of the artist. From the viewpoint of Kantianism, this is morally wrong because it treats the artist as a means to an end. From the viewpoint of Act Utilitarianism, this is ethically questionable. It is hard to weigh the net happiness of the scenario because nobody is being actively harmed. I think that while using artificial intelligence is the most practical way to get what she wants, just paying for the art commission would make both parties happy as opposed to only satisfying oneself. In my opinion, from the viewpoint of Act Utilitarianism, using AI is morally murky but slightly more immoral than not using it. From the viewpoint of Social Contract Theory, this is definitely immoral. Social Contract Theory operates under the viewpoint that selfish behavior is often a rational way to act, and that everyone should agree to treat each other in a way that is mutually beneficial to each other. Using AI to create the commission herself would be completely self-serving and cut the artist out of the equation entirely. Since this is completely selfish, it is completely immoral under the Social Contract Theory. I think that under all of the moral arguments, using AI to do the commission instead of the artist is immoral.

I think that Act Utilitarianism most closely aligns with my personal ethical framework. This is because it focuses on happiness as a primary measure for moral behavior. To me, using happiness to evaluate situations is one of the most consistent ways to make both parties happy. Also, I feel that using net happiness as a criteria is a very simple way for me to judge if an action is moral or not. For example, a technology/computing based experience I evaluated with Act Utilitarianism was doing an online survey to help with a friend’s school project. Even though I usually never take surveys, helping my friend by participating in his survey was a good decision because I believe it made both parties happy. I think that Kantianism does not suit my personal ethical framework because with Kantianism, there is sometimes no clear way to resolve a conflict, even if both parties are acting ethically towards each other. It also has an issue with more complex issues. Some of these would be things like victimless crimes, or doing things for the greater good. In my opinion, the social contract also aligns with my ethical framework, but less so because I know that not all other people are inclined to follow it. I feel like something like the Social Contract would work in a perfect world where everyone would completely respect each other’s beliefs, but not everyone is like that, and it is impossible to convince/make everyone act in a morally correct way. I don’t believe that Act Utilitarianism is perfect, as it has a couple of big pitfalls as a moral framework. Act Utilitarianism operates on the assumption that we can predict the consequences of every decision we make, which is not true. It does not take into account things we cannot predict.
